---
title: "There Are No Stupid Questions"
subtitle: "Overcoming Imposter Syndrome and realising that you're a kickass developer"
date: 2020-08-12T09:14:40+02:00
draft: true
headerUrl: "images/no-stupid-questions.jpg"
---

There are a large number of developers today that are self-taught. For the sake of this article, it may be better to call them self-motivated. These are developers that have gone through non-traditional channels in their journey to becoming developers. In my opinion, these kinds of developers have taken a better career path than those who opted to study computer science before starting to work in the industry. Don't get me wrong here. I'm not condemning those who have chosen to study computer science, nor am I calling those who have chosen to do so stupid. I do, however, feel like there is a strong case to be made in favour of skipping that step (at least at the start of your career). 

Now, this is important to set up the point I am trying to make in this article. For the longest time, many companies valued a piece of paper stating your qualifications far more than they cared about your experience or skills as an individual. That is not to say that there were no companies that were able to look past someone not having a certificate, but there were certainly not very many of them. This has led to a mindset that has become so ingrained in our culture that we do not even interrogate it anymore. We've come to see those who have been to a college or university to study the field we work in as being far superior in that field than we are. Once again, I will state, I am not bashing on people who have chosen to enrol in Tertiary education. My point here is that not every field that can be studied should be studied or needs to be studied. I have a lot more to say on this issue and I think I may write another article going into more detail on the subject, but for now, I just want to get you thinking about it in light of this article's subject matter.

#### What is imposter syndrome?
I think that every one of us probably feels the effect of imposter syndrome. Wikipedia (not the best source of information, but bear with me here) defines Imposter Syndrome as "psychological pattern in which an individual doubts their accomplishments or talents and has a persistent internalized fear of being exposed as a 'fraud'". Now if there were just a small subset of people who feel the effects of imposter syndrome, it may be something that we have to interrogate in a different light. But I'm willing to bet that almost any developer that you asked would if they are being honest, have experienced the effects of imposter syndrome before. Don't believe me? We let me ask you some questions. 
Have you ever felt stupid when asking a colleague or even Google a question about some problem you're having because you are worried that the answer to the question is something that you should already know? 
Have you ever started to write an article, but stopped because you thought "Surely I'm the only one who would find this useful. Everyone else already knows this don't they"? 
Have you ever looked at your code and mused to yourself "is this how a real developer would write this code"? 

Maybe I'm the only one who has asked these questions, but I have a sneaking suspicion that I'm not. I have felt this many times during my career as a developer. I cannot tell you how many times I have doubted myself when working on a project, especially when I am somewhat unfamiliar with the technology being used. It can be soul-wrenching. It's easy to look at other developers who have more experience than you and feel disheartened because you don't think you could ever reach their skill level. This can lead to you becoming unproductive or even to you becoming burnt out far more quickly.

#### Is there a solution?
You must know that I am not a mental health professional, nor do I claim to have all the answers in this area. I can, however, offer some tips that I use to overcome these feelings when they arise. These may not work for everyone, but maybe they can help you to find your own way of handling imposter syndrome. I also must say that I am always learning and trying to do better, so in a few months, I may have found better ways of handling this problem in my own personal capacity. 

So, let's get into it. How do I manage and overcome my imposter syndrome? 

##### 1. Identify and Acknowledge
My first step in overcoming imposter syndrome is in learning to recognize that I am feeling it. This is highly important because I can sometimes experience the feeling without realising what it is. I can find myself asking the question the questions that I asked you in the intro to the article but on a subconscious level that I may not even be aware of. Sometimes I am asking those questions in a valid context (maybe I could have written that block of code better, and maybe I should be trying to follow the example of those more experienced than me). I've had to learn when those questions are being asked by the part of me that want to learn and want to get better at what I do, or if those questions are me doubting the skills and knowledge that I know I have. I am not the world's greatest developer, but even so, I need to know that I have skills and that those skills are not irrelevant. This first step may seem extremely obvious, but if I am unable to identify the problem or acknowledge that it is there I am never going to be able to rise above it.

##### 2. Ignore What I Think Others Think
The cause of this self-doubt often stems from what I think that others are going to think or even say about me. I feel like I am going to be thought of as less of a developer because I asked a question on StackOverflow, or that people are going to label me "Captain Obvious" because I wrote an article on a topic that everyone else already knows about. But most of the time, this is all in my head. I imagine all these things that people are thinking about me and my work when I have absolutely no basis for what I'm imagining. These thoughts can be powerful, and often can be overwhelming. Luckily, they only exist in my head and so I only have to push past them, put my head down, and carry on doing what I'm doing. As a note, I am not that it is just as simple as ignoring the problem and it will go away. You and I have had to work hard to be mindful of these thoughts and to be able to ascend them, and ultimately, to be able to dismiss them. 

##### 3. Push Past, Carry On
No, I do not mean "get over it". I most often experience imposter syndrome at the onset of a problem or issue that I am facing. I will look at this thing that I have to do, and I will become riddled with doubt in myself as to how I can possibly think that I can get it done. In these cases, the best course of action, I find, is to push on and just do it. Very quickly I will find that the mental blocks that I had in my mind are not quite as hard to climb over than I had initially thought. By getting past that initial hump in the process, I am able to gain moment in what I am doing and get to a point where my self-doubt is no longer valid.

##### 4. Remember
This gets easier with time. Every time I manage to overcome the symptoms of my imposter syndrome, I force myself to make a mental note of it. If the accomplishment was big enough, I may write about it (either online or in a personal journal). These notes allow me to encourage myself when I feel the self-doubt kick in. I can look back and say "hey, I have overcome challenges in the past, and this challenge is no different". 